Install
python3 --version
Python 3.10 or newer; no third-party dependencies.

Start
python3 job_planner.py samples/plan.json
Reports completed 3 and failed 0; saves .results/latest.json.

Dependencies
python3 job_planner.py samples/plan-dependencies.json --output .results/deps.json
Reports completed 1, failed 1 and blocked 2 (exit 1): the failing branch blocks
its downstream chain while the independent CSV summary still succeeds; forward
references run in the earliest-ready plan order.

Partial runs
python3 job_planner.py samples/plan-dependencies.json --only joined-checksum
Runs only the named job plus its prerequisites; repeat --only to select several
targets. Unknown, blank or repeated names exit 2 with an error JSON.

Preview
python3 job_planner.py samples/plan-dependencies.json --preview --only joined-checksum
Prints the jobs that would run, in run order, with depends_on, reason
(target/prerequisite, or all without --only) and required_by; exits 0 and runs
nothing. The whole plan is still validated; failures exit 2 with an error JSON.

Retry preview
python3 job_planner.py samples/plan-dependencies.json --retry-preview .results/deps.json --output .results/deps.json
Reads the named report and prints {"targets": [...], "jobs": [...]}: targets are
the report's failed/blocked tasks in plan order and jobs cover them plus every
prerequisite (shared once), in run order, with the same fields as --preview.
Reports may be partial and report may equal --output. Empty results or no
failures print {"targets": [], "jobs": []}. Nothing runs or is written; a bad,
missing or escaping report path exits 2 with an error JSON. Cannot combine with
--preview or --only.

Retry
python3 job_planner.py samples/plan-dependencies.json --retry .results/deps.json --output .results/deps.json
Executes the same targets and scope the preview would show: failed/blocked
tasks plus every prerequisite (even ones that completed before, shared once);
unrecorded tasks join only when required and unrelated branches never run.
Ordering, failures and blocked_by follow a normal run, judged on this run's
results only. The report at --output holds just this run's records; report may
equal --output (targets use the pre-overwrite content). No targets prints
{"completed":0,"failed":0}, exits 0 and touches no files. Bad reports and
plans exit 2 with an error JSON; save failures exit 2 with an error-only
JSON and no statistics, keep the previous report byte-for-byte (or absent)
and do not undo finished tasks. Cannot combine with --only, --preview or
--retry-preview.

History retry preview
python3 job_planner.py samples/plan-dependencies.json --history-retry r1.json --history-retry r2.json --output .results/deps.json
Reads the named reports in the order given (oldest to newest; repeats keep
separate positions, nothing is sorted or scanned) and prints
{"targets": [...], "jobs": [...], "sources": [...]}. Each task is judged by
the last report containing it — a later missing record never clears an old
status — and only tasks whose latest status is failed/blocked become
targets, in current plan order. jobs cover the targets plus every
prerequisite (shared once, even completed or never-recorded ones), with
the same fields as --preview; sources parallels targets one to one, each
with name, status, report (verbatim) and index (zero-based report
position). No targets prints three empty arrays. Every report is validated
strictly like --history (including unselected and overridden records;
NaN/Infinity/-Infinity rejected anywhere, legal numbers accepted); bad
reports, escaping paths or a bad plan exit 2 with an error JSON and no
partial result. Nothing is read besides the plan and reports, a report
may equal --output, and nothing is created or written. Cannot combine with
--only, --record-reasons or any other execution, preview or query option.

History retry run
python3 job_planner.py samples/plan-dependencies.json --run-history-retry r1.json --run-history-retry r2.json --output .results/deps.json
Executes the same range the history retry preview would show for the same
reports (oldest to newest; repeats allowed, nothing is sorted or scanned):
each task is judged by its last recording report and only tasks whose
latest status is failed/blocked become targets; the run covers them plus
every prerequisite (shared once, even completed or never-recorded ones)
and unrelated branches never run. Ordering, failures and blocked_by follow
a normal run, judged on this run's results only. The report at --output
holds just this run's records; a report may equal --output or alias the
same file (the range uses the pre-overwrite content). No targets prints
{"completed":0,"failed":0}, exits 0 and touches no files. Bad reports,
plans or option combinations exit 2 with an error JSON; save failures exit
2 with an error-only JSON and no statistics, keep the previous report
byte-for-byte (or absent) and do not undo finished tasks. --record-reasons is
allowed and records mode "retry" with the preview's targets/jobs (no
sources); every other execution, preview or query option conflicts.

Compare
python3 job_planner.py samples/plan-dependencies.json --compare .results/deps.json .results/deps.json
Reads two reports without running anything and prints {"jobs": [...]}, one
entry per task recorded in either report in plan order, each with name,
before, after (null on the missing side; otherwise just status plus
result/error/blocked_by) and change: added, removed, changed or unchanged.
Status or payload differences count (including error text); result compares
as JSON (true is not 1, a number is not the same digits in a string,
object key order is ignored, array order matters) and numbers nested in
result compare by their exact decimal value without float precision loss
(1, 1.0 and 1e0 are equal, as are 1e400 and 10e399 and -0 and 0, while
0.10000000000000001 vs 0.1, 9007199254740992.0 vs 9007199254740993.0,
1e400 vs 2e400 and 1e-400 vs 0 differ); both sides keep the original
numeric value as a JSON number and blocked_by compares as a set and
prints in current dependency order. Both paths may be the same file.
A valid comparison exits 0 even with failed records; bad reports/
payloads, escaping paths or a bad plan exit 2 with an error JSON —
NaN, Infinity and -Infinity reject a report even in ignored extra
fields, though long decimals and legal exponents beyond float range are
fine. Nothing is created or written. Cannot combine with --only,
--preview, --retry-preview or --retry.

Explain
python3 job_planner.py samples/plan-dependencies.json --explain .results/deps.json --output .results/deps.json
Reads one report without running anything and prints {"jobs": [...]}, one
entry per failed/blocked task in plan order, each with name, status and
causes. A failed task's cause is itself with its error string; a blocked
task follows the report's blocked_by chains to terminal failed tasks or to
unrecorded tasks ({"status": "unrecorded", "error": null}), deduplicated by
name and ordered by the plan. Nothing is inferred from current files or
other declared dependencies; a blocked_by chain reaching a completed record
exits 2 with an error JSON. Partial reports are valid and unrecorded tasks
appear only as trace endpoints; no failures print {"jobs": []}. Report
validation, paths and output protection match --compare; report may equal
--output. A valid explanation exits 0 even with failed records; bad
reports, escaping paths or a bad plan exit 2 with an error JSON. Nothing is
read besides the plan and report and nothing is created or written. Cannot
combine with --only, --preview, --retry-preview, --retry or --compare.

Change preview
python3 job_planner.py samples/plan-dependencies.json --changed samples/notes.txt
Prints {"targets": [...], "jobs": [...]} for the tasks whose resolved input
path changed plus every downstream dependent (targets, in plan order) and
those targets plus all prerequisites (jobs, in run order, with the --preview
fields plus triggered_by: the directly changed tasks reaching each job, or
[] for prerequisite-only jobs). Repeat --changed for more paths; paths
resolve like plan inputs (absolute or escaping paths exit 2), need not
exist and are never read, and duplicates or argument order change nothing.
No match prints {"targets": [], "jobs": []} and still exits 0. The whole
plan is validated first; failures exit 2 with an error JSON. Nothing runs
or is written. Cannot combine with --only, --preview, --retry-preview,
--retry, --compare, --explain or --history.

Run changes
python3 job_planner.py samples/plan-dependencies.json --run-changed samples/notes.txt
Executes the same scope the change preview would show for the same paths:
directly changed tasks plus every downstream dependent (targets) and all
their prerequisites, shared once. Repeat --run-changed for more paths;
paths resolve like plan inputs (absolute or escaping paths exit 2), need
not exist and are never read, and duplicates or argument order change
nothing. Ordering, failures and blocked_by follow a normal run, judged on
this run's results only; the report at --output holds just this run's
records and out-of-scope tasks are never read or recorded. No match (or
no paths) prints {"completed":0,"failed":0}, exits 0 and touches no
files. The whole plan is validated first; failures exit 2 with an error
JSON, and save failures exit 2 with an error-only JSON and no statistics,
keep the previous report byte-for-byte (or absent) and do not undo
finished tasks.
Cannot combine with --only, --preview, --retry-preview, --retry,
--compare, --explain, --history or --changed.

Record reasons
python3 job_planner.py samples/plan-dependencies.json --record-reasons
Adds an optional record of why the run happened: the report at --output
gains one top-level "execution" object (only when at least one task
runs), with exactly mode, targets and jobs. mode is all for a full run,
only for --only selections (even selecting every job), retry for
--retry and --run-history-retry, and changes for --run-changed. targets are this run's targets
in plan order: every job, the explicit targets, the old report's
failed/blocked jobs, or the directly changed tasks plus their
downstream dependants. jobs use the corresponding preview's fields and
semantics (--preview, --retry-preview or --changed), one entry per
processed job in the same names and order as results, shared
prerequisites once; failed and blocked jobs keep their selection
reasons and results never rewrite them. With --retry onto the same
file, reasons come from the pre-overwrite content. results, the printed
counts and the exit code are unchanged and nothing but --output is
written; no retry targets or no changed match still writes no report
and creates no directory. The API option record_reasons accepts only a
boolean, and --record-reasons cannot be combined with --preview,
--retry-preview, --changed, --compare, --explain or --history (error
JSON, exit 2). Existing readers ignore execution as an extra field and
old reports need no changes.

Report saving
Every run mode saves atomically: the new report is fully serialized and
UTF-8 encoded first, then staged and moved over --output in one replace.
A report that cannot be encoded as one complete UTF-8 JSON document fails
with an error JSON and exit 2 before the filesystem is touched; a
filesystem error while creating the directory, saving the content or
replacing the output (including --output already being a directory) also
exits 2 with an error-only JSON and no statistics. Either way the previous
report keeps its exact bytes — or stays absent when there was none — no
partial or extra files remain (empty new parent directories may), and
finished tasks are not rolled back. Only a successful save replaces the
old report, so a historical report that is also --output stays queryable
after a failed save; an in-root symlink output updates the resolved
target and keeps the link.

Smoke Test
python3 -B -m unittest -v
Checks real file operations, recorded errors, directory boundaries, symlinks,
dependency validation/blocking, plan, retry and history-retry previews, manual
and history-range retries, change-driven runs, report comparison, failure
explanation and the CLI.
